#separator:tab
#html:false
#columns:Question	Answer
What is the module competence for "Basics of System Engineering"?	Understand the necessity of systems and system design (level 3: apply).
Which step of System Engineering is this chapter?	Step 1 — Basics of System Engineering (before Requirements, Risk, Change, Ideation, Design, Test, Project Setup).
What are the two parts of System Design?	The System (the purpose / "what") and the Design (the "how").
Define a "system".	A group of associated components that work together for the same purpose and that can be bordered from the environment.
What turns a group of parts into a system rather than an accumulation?	The components have different characteristics/features and share one purpose; without that it's just an accumulation.
Are system borders always sharp?	Mostly yes — systems are clearly bordered from others and the environment, but there can be partial overlaps at interfaces.
Give three examples of NATURAL systems and what they enable.	Galaxy (enables life), Leaf (photosynthesis), Lung (breathing) — developed without active human input.
Give three examples of ARTIFICIAL systems.	Piano (sound), Airplane (fly), Robot (human expressions); also search engine, sports team, organization — made by mankind.
What are the three TYPES of systems?	Natural systems, Artificial systems, Biotechnical systems.
What are the three types of man-made (artificial) systems?	Technical (machines, tools), Social (family, groups, work), Sociotechnical (technical + social influencing each other, e.g. information/work system).
Classify systems by exchange with the environment.	Open (full interfaces — info/material/energy), Partly open (small pre-defined data, e.g. OBD in a car), Isolated (nothing exchanged).
Can different parts of one system have different openness? Give an example.	Yes — a cleaning robot's tracking system is isolated, while its recorded map is shown via the open Bluetooth interface.
What does "Cyber" stand for?	Short form of "cybernetics".
Define cybernetics.	Control of machines including the feedback of sense organs (analogy to lifeforms) and the feedback of social interactions (communication).
List the elements of a cybernetic control loop in order.	Target value → difference (target − current) → Controller → Command → Actuator → Action → System/Environment → Reaction → Sensor → Current value → fed back (−).
"Cyber" is used as a prefix for which topics?	Computer/virtual-reality topics: Cybersecurity, Cyberspace, Cyberwarfare, Cybercrime, Cyber-attack, Cyborgs.
What is a cyborg?	A crossover of organic ("man") and biomechatronic ("machine") parts.
Define a mechatronic system.	A merge of software + hardware (mechanics & electronics); can be a standalone, closed system. E.g. washing machine.
Define a Cyber-Physical System (CPS).	A merge of intercommunicating software components (esp. embedded, via internet = cyber) + hardware (mechanics & electronics = physical); for large-scale, distributed networks (IoT). E.g. home automation linking washer + photovoltaic.
Is there a sharp distinction between mechatronic systems and CPS?	No — there is no sharp deviation between them.
Applied to this lecture, what "things" make up a system?	Physical: sensors, actuators, PCB & wires. Cyber: processing unit, AI, general software. → A Cyber-Physical System.
What does the System Wheel's inner ring (core) represent?	The "DNA" of the system — the core properties you'd write on a one-page datasheet (e.g. performance, consumption, cost, reliability, weight, size).
What are the three realization domains in the System Wheel?	Mechanics, E/E (electrics/electronics), and Software.
What is the SIPOC logic?	Supplier – Input – Process – Output – Customer — a general way to describe any process.
Give the high-level structure of a system (SIPOC applied).	Sensor → Connector → Logic → Connector → Actuator/Visualizer.
In the system structure, what is a "Connector"?	The link between blocks — PCB, wire, wireless, etc.
In the system structure, what counts as "Logic"?	Software, IC, calculator, state machine, AI, etc.
In the system structure, what is an "Actuator/Visualizer"?	The output element — motor, valve, HMI, database, etc.
Map ChatGPT onto the system structure.	Sensor = prompt webpage; Connector = data transfer to server; Logic = "magic of AI"; Connector = data transfer to browser; Visualizer = output field.
What are the four system levels (top to bottom)?	Supersystem (rare) → System → Sub-system → Component.
Which system levels always exist and which are optional?	System and Component always exist; Supersystem and Sub-system are optional.
Why must a lower level always have more than 1 element?	Otherwise the lower level would equal the higher one, so that level would not exist.
How can the same element be at different levels?	It depends on integration/point of view — e.g. a car is a "system" for the car-maker but a "supersystem"; a screw is a "system" for the screw supplier.
What are "tiers" in industry?	The supplier levels: manufacturer → tier-1 → tier-2 → tier-3 supplier, etc.
What is a component (system part)?	The basic element of a system; clearly bordered, with different functions/tasks.
Name the kinds of components (real and immaterial).	Real: hardware (electronics/mechanics/hydraulics), software (functions/interfaces), material/consumables (chemicals/liquids). Immaterial: talents & roles, ideas.
Define emergence.	A system can have other properties than the simple sum of its single components' properties ("1+1=3").
Give two examples of emergence.	A single sulphur atom has no colour but many are yellow; a single molecule has no pressure but a gas (many molecules) has pressure.
Why is "ignorance" NOT emergence?	Some effects are merely unknown due to low state-of-the-art knowledge and disappear as knowledge evolves — that is not emergence.
What does VUCA stand for?	Volatile, Uncertain, Complex, Ambiguous.
VUCA — what does "Volatile" mean?	Discontinuity; high speed & intensity; large ranges of fluctuation.
VUCA — what does "Uncertain" mean?	Countless scenarios with unclear outcome; unknown future / low predictability; things seem to emerge from "nothing".
VUCA — what does "Complex" mean?	Elements connected in many layers; many different systems; clear boundaries hard to define.
VUCA — what does "Ambiguous" mean?	No simple description; situations can be interpreted differently.
What defines a system's level of complexity?	The amount of different components, their order, and their interaction. Complex systems can't be broken into easier problems.
List the properties of complex systems.	Agent-based, non-linear, emergence, open, self-organised, self-regulating, path-dependencies.
Difference between "complicated" and "complex" systems?	Complicated: all elements/rules/dependencies known, predictable, removable by training → waterfall PM. Complex: (partly) unknown elements/rules, not predictable, can't be removed → agile/SCRUM PM.
Is a subway grid plan complex or complicated? Why?	Complicated — many stations/lines but clear rules and dependencies; all elements known; much effort but predictable.
Is weather complex or complicated? Why?	Complex — not all elements known, all interconnected, and the kind of interconnection is unknown.
What is a Complex Adaptive System (CAS)?	A system that changes itself (adapts/learns) based on its environment, so it's not statically analysable. E.g. stock exchange, human brain.
What is a Multi-Agent System (MAS) / agent-based modelling?	A system of several homogeneous/heterogeneous "agents" that communicate; autonomous, distributed, self-organised (no overarching controller); an agent broadcasts when it takes a job to avoid double work. E.g. ant colony, DAI.
How is complexity measured in IT?	By "Computational Complexity Theory" via resource demand: computing time, storage, chip size, number of parallel chips.
Rule for connectivity between elements on the same level but different units?	There must be NO interaction — if there is, the element border is set wrong (risk of wrong responsibilities).
What can interactions between elements swap?	Information, material, energy — interdependent and normally not unidirectional.
What defines the degree of connectivity?	The amount of (different) nodes and the amount of causal connections between them.
How is the degree of connectivity measured?	With the clustering coefficient (computed exactly; a bidirectional connection counts as 2).
What is System Dynamics?	The modelling and simulating of overall systems to analyse complex/dynamic systems (because they can't be described easily/linearly). Variants: qualitative and quantitative.
Qualitative system dynamics — what does it do?	Identifies feedback loops between items: reinforcing loops (positive coupling) and balancing loops (negative coupling). Easier than quantitative; gives a good overview.
Quantitative system dynamics — what does it do?	Models & simulates the whole system, gives real numbers, allows many scenario runs, uses flow charts/process views, finds non-linear effects.
What is Chaos Theory?	A field studying non-linear dynamic systems; the "butterfly effect" — small changes have big effects and prediction is impossible. E.g. turbulent gas flow, the internet.
Define "design" (system design).	The process of translating requirements (respecting the system purpose) into a (technical) solution.
What are the deliverables of a design?	Plan, drawings/schematics, models, software code, etc.
Why can't design, integration and production be strictly divided?	They influence each other; without knowing production capabilities you risk a non-producible (ball-in-ball) or non-commercial (all-gold wires) part — so prototypes must be built and tested upfront.
What are the three classes of company processes?	Core processes, Management processes, Support processes.
What is a core process?	Activities working on business with customers & suppliers; value-adding (increasing corporate/customer value). Flow: customer requirement → core process → customer satisfaction.
Name BMW's simplified core process phases.	ItO (Idea to Offer), OtO (Offer to Order), OtD (Order to Delivery), DtCC (Delivery to Customer Care).
What is "ItO" (Idea to Offer)?	The core development process from requirement → ideas/concepts → implementation; purchasing procures materials/tools; after test & validation and industrialisation the product is released for production. Aim: meet all requirements, optimal product.
Define System Engineering.	An interdisciplinary field of classical engineering + engineering management; design, integrate & manage complex systems over their life cycle; defined in ISO/IEC 15288.
List the steps of the System Engineering process.	Requirement Management → Ideation/Concept → Design/Realization → Test & Verification & Validation → Release; surrounded by Risk Management and Change Management.
What happens in Requirement Management?	Systematic analysis of the problem & requests (Customer, Law, LeLe); break the problem into requirements; define the system's requirements.
What happens in Ideation / Concept?	Creative search for ideas/solutions (maybe research); define functions; create system architecture; break (super)system → subsystem → components; break requirements into levels; interface design.
What happens in Design / Realization?	Model, simulate, analyse; implement functions into real HW/E-E/SW; integrate levels; system documentation. → Core engineering work.
What happens in Test & Verification & Validation?	Test design, the "test of the test", planning, execution (virtual + hardware). → Proof by measurement that every requirement is fulfilled.
What happens in Release?	Sign off the developed system; release to production; take over accountability (per requirements & law) towards the customer.
What is the role of Change Management in System Engineering?	Update the system on changing requirements (new law, customer change of mind, LeLe/field issues); version control of system & components.
What does the "tree-swing" cartoon illustrate?	The result of building a system WITHOUT system design and requirement management — every department builds something different from the customer's need.
Name several System Engineering challenges.	Globalization & many suppliers; rising legal specs; unclear responsibilities; interdisciplinary work; diverse interfaces; complex requirements; many product variants; reduced cycle time; distributed sensor networks; communication handling; information gathering; hard to verify; safety.
Why is sensor fusion needed (challenge)?	To describe an object, data from different (types of) sensors distributed by location must be combined — e.g. camera at the windscreen + lidar in the bumper.
How many wiring-harness variants does a typical car have?	About 425 billion possible combinations (e.g. VW Golf) due to customization.
In the autonomous-AI-car accident, who could be accountable?	Many parties — owner (renting company), customer, "driver" friend, sensor supplier, sensor-fusion dev, car maker, SW/HW devs, AI dev, AI trainer, dataset supplier, internet/interconnection suppliers — mastering this complexity is the future challenge.
System Wheel — what does the "customer perspective" cover?	The inner "DNA" ring; customer raises system-level requirements; expectations: intelligence, inter-connection, performance increase, user-friendly.
System Wheel — what does the property engineer do?	Translates customer requirements into system properties for one property (the "voice of the customer"); aims at overarching property optimization, breaking solution-open requirements down to component-teams.
System Wheel — what does the system engineer (product perspective) do?	Mediates between property engineers, ensures process compliance, and decides in case of conflicting targets (since properties impact each other).
What is MBSE?	Model-Based Systems Engineering — like the System Wheel + a model; models the system (not just text), enables cross-discipline communication, holds all system info independent of realization domains; needs a harmonized modelling language.
Name benefits of MBSE.	Better visualization, architectures & dependencies (traceability), automated tests/plausibility checks, different views of one system, foreseeable change impacts, direct code generation (MDSD).
Which languages are used for MBSE modelling?	UML (Unified Modeling Language) and SysML (Systems Modeling Language).
What is MDSD (MDD)?	Model-Driven Software Development — automatically creates functional software, tests and documentation directly from the model without coding. E.g. Simulink → C-code.
Advantages and disadvantages of MDSD?	Advantages: higher abstraction (clearer), faster development, faster system-fitting test cases. Disadvantages: more initial modelling effort, hard to integrate manual code, harder system-level troubleshooting.
What is Digital Engineering?	The successor of MBSE (defined by INCOSE / GfSE in Germany); uses "digital twins" to see performance live and interact virtually; uses MBSE, AI, CAD/CAE, additive manufacturing, VR/AR.
Give example fields of application for CPS / system engineering.	Traffic control, production/logistics, medical devices (smartwatch emergency call), energy control & smart grid, automotive (lane keeping, auto-stop, distance control).
What is the core summary message of the chapter?	Rising complexity (components + VUCA + interconnections) forces engineers to develop whole systems/functions, not single parts; system engineering handles this; holistic thinking avoids failures and reaches the overall optimum.
