#separator:tab
#html:false
#columns:Question	Answer
What is the definition of a "requirement"?	An accurately phrased development target for a property of the system or component, considering all relevant conditions.
How many requirements does a typical product have?	Several hundred to (ten-)thousands, depending on product complexity (and growing over time).
Which standards define requirements (engineering)?	ISO/IEC/IEEE 29148 (software requirements engineering) and ISO/IEC 25000 (SQuaRE). Also in maturity models CMMI, SPICE (ISO/IEC 15504), ISO/IEC 12207.
What does ItO (Idea to Offer) describe?	The core development process: customer requirement → ItO → offer → product. Purchasing procures in parallel; after test/validation & industrialization the product is released for production.
What is the goal of requirement management?	Identify the necessary requirements from (super)system level down to component level and maintain them over the whole lifecycle to build the right product.
What does the "tree-swing" cartoon illustrate?	That every department understands the same words differently — which is why requirement management is needed to create one common understanding.
What is RM the enabler of?	Higher customer satisfaction, common understanding between customer & supplier, avoidance of safety/field (quality) issues, fewer late changes & cost impacts, and LeLe.
Why is RM the essential discipline in systems design?	If the targets (requirements) are set wrong, the whole product is wrong.
Name the three main challenges for RM.	Clear & distinct definition, completeness (missing requirements found too late), and inaccurate interpretation of requirements.
What are the two main (core) documents in RM?	The Product Requirements Document (PRD / Lastenheft) and the Implementation Specification (Pflichtenheft).
What is the PRD (Lastenheft)?	The sum of all requirements of a commercial customer; used in the nomination phase to request technical & commercial offers from suppliers. (DIN 69901-5 / IEEE SRS 29148.)
What does a PRD contain?	Introduction, current state, target/main requirements, interfaces, functional requirements, non-functional requirements (NFR), system architecture, expected scope of delivery, acceptance criteria.
How detailed should a PRD be for external vs internal development?	Internal: detailed & tiered down. External: kept on a generic property level to avoid specifying the solution.
What is the Implementation Specification (Pflichtenheft)?	The supplier's answer to the customer's PRD: the "How" (technical concept) and the "With what" (resources, project plan) to realize the requirements.
When does development start in RM?	When the customer accepts the supplier's Implementation Specification (and every PRD requirement is covered by at least one deliverable).
Which models/bodies describe the RM process?	IEEE (SWEBOK), CMMI, IIBA (BABOK), Volere, IREB.
What are the two freeze milestones in the RM process?	PRD freeze and Implementation-specification freeze.
Who steers the RM process in large developments?	A requirement manager.
How do requests cascade by role?	Customer (request) → Property Engineer (1→x system properties) → Developer (x→y component/sub-system requirements).
List the 6 phases of the requirement-management process.	(1) Collect requests, (2) Assess requests, (3) Develop requirements, (4) Tier down, (5) Validation/Verification, (6) Follow up of changes.
What is the prior source of external requests?	The customer — it should and must be the prior source. (Also: law, standards & guidelines, cultural/political/social expectations.)
What happens to gained knowledge as you add interview partners?	It decreases — diminishing returns with more interviewees.
What is the use-case format for capturing demand?	"As… [role] / I would like to… [function] / To… [reason]." Use cases are named after their goal.
Name typical internal requests.	LeLe (lessons learned), company standards, existing tool kits, company strategy, CI/design, business-department restrictions.
What is LeLe (Lessons Learned)?	Knowledge management: using prior-project knowledge at a kick-off to avoid known errors and apply best practices; updated throughout, transferred to the new standard at the project end.
What is the golden rule of LeLe documentation?	The solution is NOT just the negation of the problem — write a concrete, sustainably anchored action (e.g. "start the test ≥2 weeks before release and anchor it in the project plan").
Which areas does LeLe knowledge cover?	Technical, project-management, and commercial knowledge — documented in software.
Give examples of regional standards.	TGL (German DDR), DIN (German BRD), GB / GB-T (China).
Give examples of international and industry standards.	International: EN (European), ISO (mechanics), IEC (electrical/electronics). Industry: IATF (automotive), VDE (electrotechnics).
What three ways are used to assess requests?	By Relevance, by Priority, and by Classification.
What does assessing by Relevance mean?	Is the request relevant for this specific product? (e.g. if not sold in Japan, ignore Japanese law/expectations.)
What does Priority depend on?	Which request wins if not all can be fulfilled (e.g. safety) — and the company strategy/focus; requirements often negatively impact each other.
Name design strategies that influence priority.	Design for Customer (Design Thinking), for Costs, for Quality/Reliability, for Production/Manufacturing (DFM), for Service.
What is the Kano model and who created it?	A method to prioritise customer requests by linking implemented features to customer satisfaction; by Prof. Dr. Noriaki Kano (evolved from quality management).
List the 5 levels of the Kano model.	Basic needs (must), Performance needs (should), Delighter (could), Indifferent, Reverse (don't).
Kano: describe basic needs (must).	Natural & self-evident; only noticed when missing; absence causes dissatisfaction but presence gives no extra satisfaction; nearly no competitor differentiation (e.g. call-centre greeting).
Kano: describe performance needs (should).	Recognised by the customer; satisfaction scales with the degree of fulfilment (e.g. hotline waiting time).
Kano: describe delighters (could).	Unexpected features that create enthusiasm; a small increase gives a disproportionally large benefit (e.g. live status tracking of a ticket).
Kano: describe indifferent and reverse features.	Indifferent = presence/absence has little impact (e.g. hold-music song). Reverse (don't) = its presence lowers satisfaction (e.g. jargon in a hotline call).
How can a Kano classification change?	By customer (delighter for one = reverse for another), by price/business model (delighter on budget = basic on premium), and over time (delighters become basic needs).
How is Kano feedback gathered?	By structured interview or standardized written survey (to remove interviewer impact), including demographic data to find peer groups and variants.
What question pair does a Kano survey ask?	A functional question ("How would you feel if it had MORE of…?") and a dysfunctional question ("…if it had LESS/none of…?"); the class is read from the answer combination.
Kano combination: "I expect it" + "I dislike it" =	Basic need (must).
Kano combination: "I like it" + "I dislike it" =	Performance need (should).
Kano combination: "I like it" + "I am neutral" =	Delighter (could).
How are requirements classified by "Belonging"?	Product requirements (What) [SE focus], Process requirements (How), External requirements (Rest).
Functional requirement vs NFR?	Functional = a dedicated feature (e.g. the system prints my file). NFR = an expectation that is not a feature (e.g. available 24/7 with 99.9% uptime).
What are the attributes of a function?	Inputs/outputs, value range/dimensions, accepted margin/tolerance, how often executed, how fast results must be available (throughput time).
List qualities a good requirement must have.	Complete, correct, SMART, testable, linked, necessary, short, atomic, active voice, no weak words, understandable, traceable, unambiguous & consistent, feasible, equipped with properties.
Why must a requirement be atomic and in active voice?	Atomic = one requirement per sentence. Active ("The motor rotates the shaft") is clearer than passive ("The shaft is driven by the motor").
What are weak words and how are they found?	Vague words like "really, very, roughly"; identified with tools such as ReQualize or DESIRe.
Name key properties of a requirement.	Unique ID, description, rationale/target, originator, creator, user, fit criterion, priority, dependencies/interfaces, conflicts, release/maturity, linked documents, comments, version, change history, status.
What does SMART stand for?	Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Reasonable, Time-Bound.
Why does "specific" matter? (man-on-the-mountain example)	Natural language is ambiguous ("I saw the man on the mountain with the telescope" has many readings); fix it with mathematical/IF-THEN descriptions and by excluding variants.
What is the lesson of the bicycle "TV box" example?	Don't be too specific — specify the problem (reduce shipping damage), not the solution; a clever solution (a box looking like a TV) then emerges.
What makes a requirement testable?	It must be specific, detailed, affordable to test, and linked to a maturity level (e.g. "efficient" is untestable — 75%? 80%?).
Why must verification be affordable?	You must not need impractical tests — e.g. crashing many real cars just to verify "the mute button is accessible after a crash".
General guideline for writing requirements?	Positive not negative; avoid "could/should"; be specific ("robust" → works after 10× 2 m drops on concrete); say WHAT not HOW.
What must a requirement be linked to?	Its request, mother/child requirements, neighbour requirements, functions & NFR, test items, and interfaces.
What does the bridge example teach about linking?	A bridge built from Germany (North-Sea zero) and Switzerland (Mediterranean zero) had a 28 cm step, and the correction was made in the wrong direction — unlinked requirements cause costly errors.
How does SCRUM handle requirements?	A simplified agile approach: Epic → feature request stored in the product backlog → sprint backlog; backlog rows use the role/function/reason format.
What is the System Wheel?	An overview of typical mechatronic-system properties: hub (mechanics/E-E/software), inner core "DNA" datasheet properties, and 10 extended properties.
Name the core "DNA" (datasheet) properties of the System Wheel.	Performance, consumption, acoustic, costs, reliability, weight, size.
Name the 10 extended properties of the System Wheel.	Acoustical behaviour, performance & efficiency, data acquisition/access & security, design for production/service/upgrade, safety, EMC, sustainability, reliability, thermal behaviour, volumetric behaviour & design.
What is the role of the property engineer?	The voice of the customer for one property; optimises across the whole system (not one component), thinking in system functions, and breaks the function down to component requirements.
What does FMK mean in the System Wheel?	Funktionsmaßkonzept — the tolerance concept of interconnecting components (under volumetric behaviour & design).
What is "tier down"?	Breaking system requirements down to lower levels (e.g. component level) so the component team can develop and take responsibility for them.
What must the receiver of a tiered-down requirement do?	Accept, reject, or feedback a request for change — and only own what they can actually build (e.g. a speaker maker won't own the sound of the whole car).
Describe the new-requirement decision flow (tier down).	New requirement → inbox/pool → acceptable? If yes, add to component requirements. If no, modification possible? Yes → modify (or decline with reason); No → discard.
What is the system hierarchy for tier-down?	Supersystem (4) → System (3) → Sub-system (2) → Component (1).
What is RM's role in validation/verification (phase 5)?	RM does not perform verification but tracks whether each (testable) requirement was successfully confirmed by testing (see Test & Verification chapter).
What happens in phase 6 (changes)?	Changes of requests & requirements are tracked and followed up (see Change Management chapter).
What is "analysis paralysis"?	Analysing and defining forever to be 100% perfect instead of starting realization — RM is important but must avoid this.
What functions must professional RM software provide?	Administrate, structure/sort/filter, tailor to owner, manage workflow/status, link requirements, change history & versioning, and branching — with traceability & transparency.
What is ReqIF?	Requirement Interchange Format — an XML data format managed by ProSTEP iViP e.V., used to exchange requirements between different software and between customer & supplier.
Name example requirement-management tools.	Codebeamer (PTC), DOORS (IBM), JAMA. Agile tools: ClickUp, cplace, Jira.
What is the core summary message of requirement management?	RM is the most important step in system design; it ensures the right product with the right quality and highest customer satisfaction; it runs in 6 phases and focuses on properties, not technical solutions.
