#separator:tab
#html:false
#columns:Question	Answer
What is the definition of "risk" (ISO 9001)?	"Risk is the effect of uncertainty." An event/circumstance that can prevent reaching the project goal (probability < 100%).
Difference between a risk and a problem?	Risk = has NOT happened yet (probability < 100%). Problem = it has ALREADY occurred (handled differently).
Which two kinds of risk must be kept separate?	General company risks vs project-specific risks.
What is PDCA and its other names?	Plan–Do–Check–Act. Also called the Deming cycle or Shewhart cycle (from ISO 9001).
PDCA – what happens in "Plan"?	Plan the process/product, set goals & resources, address risks & opportunities.
PDCA – Do, Check, Act?	Do = implement the plan; Check = monitor & measure the process/target; Act = take action to improve performance.
Which method is used in the PDCA "Plan" phase?	FMEA.
Can a risk be positive?	Yes — opportunities can be recorded as positive events.
What is a "speak-up line"?	An anonymous channel for employees to report undiscovered risks and violations.
Do risks add up like costs?	No. Risks do not add up — they must be aggregated using models/simulations (e.g. Monte Carlo).
How do you reduce risk through diversification?	Use diversified and NON-correlating solutions; asset & time diversification (idea by Harry Markowitz, Nobel Prize).
Sensor reliability example – wrong vs right way to improve a 50% ECU?	Wrong: add a 2nd identical ECU (increases failure). Right: add a different, mechanical crash detector.
What does the portfolio "efficiency curve" mean?	Optimum portfolios lie on the curve; nothing can be above it; portfolios below it are inefficient.
What does ISO 9001 demand regarding risk?	"Risk-based thinking" — use opportunities and prevent unwanted outcomes.
What is ISO 31000?	The dedicated "Risk Management" standard.
What are provisions (Rückstellungen)?	Money set aside for company/product risks; linked to quality management.
Risk management at company level is what kind of task?	A managerial task.
Name the 9 levels/areas risks can affect.	Technical/product, Compliance, Finances/costs, Time, Market, Currency, Social, Project-management, Environmental.
Who defined the 6 levels of risk management?	Gleißner & Mott.
What is KonTraG?	German law obliging management to perform risk analysis.
List the targets/steps of risk management (6).	Detect → Analyse → Evaluate → Control → Monitor → Document & communicate.
What are the 4 options when CONTROLLING a risk?	Avoid, Prevent, Transfer, Accept.
What does "Detect" involve?	Regular & systematic internal AND external analysis; frequency depends on the volatility of the environment.
Name the 6 methods to detect risks.	KPI changes, LeLe (lessons learned), Headstand/Flip-Flop, Delphi, Risk workshop, PAAG/HAZOP.
Three safety detection methods in development?	ALARP (As Low As Reasonably Practicable), FMEA, DRBFM (Design Review Based on Failure Mode).
Head-stand / Flip-Flop method – 4 steps?	1) Invert the thesis, 2) find solutions for the flipped thesis, 3) invert those solutions, 4) define actions.
What is the key idea of the Delphi method?	Experts answer anonymously with no discussion; share major deviations; repeat until consolidated; take the average.
When evaluating a risk, which two properties are scored?	Severity (how bad) and Occurrence/likelihood (how likely; subjective — not called "probability").
Combining severity and occurrence produces what?	A risk matrix (used to prioritise); all risks kept in a risk list managed by the PM/risk manager.
Three ways to assess possible IMPACT?	Historical data ("empirical values"), probability distribution (e.g. normal), Monte Carlo simulation.
Severity & Occurrence example scales – ranges?	Severity 1 (low) → 4 (very high). Occurrence 0 (0%, eliminated) → 5 (100%, occurred = problem).
What is Risk Avoidance?	Reduce occurrence to 0 — ban activities, remove features, use technical barriers like Poka Yoke.
What is Poka Yoke?	Japanese for "avoid silly mistakes" — mistake-proofing for immediate error detection (e.g. key-lock principle).
What is Risk Prevention?	Reduce occurrence OR mitigate severity using quality/process methods (e.g. PDCA).
What is Risk Transfer?	Shift the risk to whoever handles it better — e.g. crash ECU risk transferred to the car chassis.
What is Risk Acceptance?	Consciously accept a risk — only if occurrence AND impact are low.
What does FMEA stand for and what is it?	Failure Mode and Effects Analysis — a reliability-improvement method.
FMEA rates defects by which three factors?	Severity, Probability (Occurrence), Recognizability.
What are the goals of an FMEA?	Recognise systematic & random errors before they occur; derive detection & prevention measures; improve successor products.
What is FMECA?	FMEA + a "Criticality" metric for risk of failure → enables prioritisation (usually what people mean by FMEA).
What is FMEDA?	FMEA + "Diagnostics"; multiple-error analysis; used for automotive electronics; accounts for self-detection lowering failure rate.
What are the three TYPES of FMEA?	System FMEA, D-FMEA (Design), P-FMEA (Process).
Difference between D-FMEA and P-FMEA?	D-FMEA = development/customer focus, avoid systemic errors; P-FMEA = production-process weaknesses; the two must be linked.
Key FMEA standards by domain?	Automotive: ISO 26262. Industry: IEC 61508, ISO 13849. Aerospace: DO-254, ARP 4761.
Describe the FMEA process.	Prepared early (before detailed plans), built in expert workshops from many domains, created from cause→error, then verify the assumed probabilities.
What is the Rule of Ten?	The later an error is found, the higher the cost — ~×10 per stage: Planning 1€ → Development 10€ → Assembly 100€ → Final acceptance 1000€ → Customer.
Until when must an FMEA be maintained?	Until EOP (End of Production), better EOS (End of Sales); update it on product changes; old FMEA feeds the next project (LeLe).
How is the RPV calculated?	RPV = Severity × Probability(Occurrence) × Recognizability, each rated 1–10.
Recognizability scale direction in FMEA?	1 = surely recognized (≥99% detected); 10 = certainly not recognized (<10% detected) — opposite of severity.
What is a Special Characteristic (SC)?	A high-severity feature marked on drawings; each SC must be checked/measured in production; can also be a legal requirement.
SC variants in the automotive industry?	BMW: L/S/F (Legal/Safety/Function). Daimler: DS/DZ. VW: D/S (Documented/Safety).
What is a System FMEA?	Considers the whole system + subsystems, focuses on interfaces and interaction with the environment; finds random & systemic errors.
Software tools to track risks?	ClickUp, cplace, Jira — with consistent linking to up/downstream processes.
Summary – core message of risk management?	Avoid greater damage; identify risks as early as possible (Rule of Ten); rate by severity & occurrence; use FMEA and derive SCs.
Walter Scheel's risk quote?	"Nothing happens without risk, but without taking risks also nothing happens." — still take risks to move forward.
