#separator:tab
#html:false
#columns:Question	Answer
What are the two module competences for Change Management?	Understand the necessity of change management (level 1); apply the process of change management to projects (level 3).
Which System Engineering step is Change Management?	Step 4 (after Risk Management, before Ideation); it sits between PRD freeze and Re-lease.
What is engineering change management (CM)?	The process of changing a product or parts of it (Ger. Änderungsmanagement, ÄM).
What is the "other" change management we DON'T mean in this course?	Organizational change management (Ger. Veränderungsmanagement) — changing processes, behaviours, strategy, systems, structures.
What is the content and target of CM?	Content: align, track and follow up changes of requests & requirements. Target: as few changes as possible (stable development) but as many as needed (sellable product).
When is a change NOT change management?	When the change is intended by the product itself (e.g. a chameleon changing colour). A change of the product DESIGN is change management.
List the four disciplines VM/LCM/CM/CM by the object they manage.	Variant management = products/variants; Life cycle management = new generations; Configuration management = HW+SW configurations; Change management = components. Object count increases top→down.
Give an example object for each of VM, LCM, Config-CM, Change-CM.	VM: sedan/convertible variants. LCM: BMW 3-series E90→F30→G20. Config-CM: ECU SW 3.7.2 + d-sample PCB. Change-CM: the d-sample PCB.
Which two disciplines both abbreviate to "CM"?	Configuration management and Change management — must not be mixed up.
What four factors increase the effort of a change?	System complexity, late point of detection (Rule of Ten), overlapping (parallel) changes, and variants.
Name the 4 phases of WHEN to do change management.	Until SOP (most changes); Launch management (just before SOP, critical); SOP→EOP (trouble-shooting & cost-down); After EOP (record field issues, improve next product).
WHERE should changes be documented, and what is the key rule?	At two IT locations: (1) project-management level (whole change) and (2) where the original object was created (e.g. PDM system). Both MUST be linked, or the data branches.
For whom is CM applicable, and what is recommended for suppliers?	All internal AND bought/supplied products. Suppliers must report all changes; only nominate ISO 9001-certified suppliers and put the reporting duty in the contract.
Why do change management? (key reasons)	Enables design-for-upgrade capability, traceability (versioning), releasable/conform product, cost control, avoids extra work/missed deadlines/dev issues, keeps high quality.
What is the relationship between the level and the amount of changes?	The higher the level of change, the fewer (smaller amount of) such changes occur.
What are the 3 TYPES of change?	Scope-Enlargement (add new content), Scope-Reduction (cancel existing content), Scope-Change (change existing content).
Evolutionary vs Revolutionary/Disruptive change?	Evolutionary = gradual improvement of state of the art (e.g. better phone); risk of long-term failure if never disruptive. Revolutionary = radical rethink/new solution (e.g. smartphone replacing telephone); risk the product won't establish.
What is the motivation for version control?	Traceability of the configuration over the whole life cycle: change frequency & object evolution visible, and return to previous versions possible.
Key principle of version control on changing an object?	Never overwrite — create a NEW version. The version number is an attribute (auto-counter in pro tools).
How is an object uniquely identified in version control?	By the combination of ID/name + version number (e.g. requirement #073 alone isn't enough — v1.0 or v1.1?).
Name the version-numbering schemes.	Single-level numeric (0,1,2…), single-level alphabetical (a,b,…,aa,ab…), and two-stage (a.0…b.0 or 1.1,1.2,2.0).
Explain MAJOR.MINOR.MICRO versioning with example 3.9.4.	Major = significant change/re-design (before the dot); Minor = feature/improvement (after the dot); Micro = patch/bug-fix. Next: 4.9.4 (major), 3.10.4 (minor — not 4.x!), or 3.9.5 (micro).
Outline the version-control PROCESS.	Like "new requirements": change into pool → acceptable? → No: decline with reason (or modify & re-loop) → Yes: release new version.
What should be documented in version control? (content)	Object, status, version number, what changed, why, for whom (which product/date), who changed it, when, who approved, when approved.
What does ISO 9001 require for document control?	Information available & suitable where/when needed; adequately protected (confidentiality, integrity); managed for distribution/access/discovery/use; stored with preserved readability; change-monitored; external documents marked.
Example: where to keep a machine's safety manual?	Directly at the machine so the operator always has access — not only on a digital folder/drive.
Challenge with storing documents readable for 30 years?	Paper vs digital media — can you still read a CD/USB/hard-drive AND its file format after 30 years?
What replaces individual 2D drawings in modern drawing control?	A central drawing management with master data, drawing, permissions, change history, release status, creator, etc.
What can be the impact of a change?	Increased complexity (variants/configs) → quality issues & lower customer satisfaction; time delay; worse cost/benefit; breaks the PRD contract; worst case the whole project is stopped.
What is the "inversed Rule of Ten"?	The LATER the root cause (not detection!) sits in the design process, the easier and cheaper the change. Cheapest→dearest: update design → update assembly process → change concept → redesign test → change whole system.
What causes a design & concept change?	Failed tests (bad concept/design/implementation); realization issues (HW won't work or too costly → switch to SW); needing a re-design or new concept.
Ideal vs reality of the PRD freeze?	Ideal: hard PRD freeze, no requirement changes after it. Reality: the freeze is partly soft, so changes are needed.
What are "have-to" requirement changes?	Mandatory changes before launch: a changing law effective before launch; a failed verification → relax an over-engineered requirement (else change design/concept).
What are "can-be" requirement changes?	Optional/your decision: new/extended applications, company strategy, customer expectation (B2B = extra cost), tool kits (e.g. round→rectangular plugs), cultural/political expectations.
How do you handle a requirement change? (process)	Re-open the requirement process → impact analysis (resources + risks) → create a CR (change request) → CCB/project lead decides & records → prioritize (cost/benefit) → plan implementation.
What is the current valid configuration equal to?	The base line (reference) + all CRs (change requests).
After approving a change, what steps follow?	Update the requirements, document the change (versioning), implement, track the verification, release the change.
What is a new product generation, and what manages it?	Passing the development process several times for one product creates a new generation; product lifecycle management (PLM/LCM) controls this.
Positive vs negative reasons to repeat the product lifecycle?	Positive: new customer requirements, intrinsic advancement, state-of-the-art advances. Negative: competing products, quality issues, bad reviews, cost reduction.
Horizontal vs vertical networking of life cycles?	Horizontal = across generations, usually forward-only. Vertical = across products, bidirectional; strength depends on the products' "technical proximity" and works across generations too.
What four things can a life-cycle BRANCH do?	Continue linearly, reunite (merge), run separately (split), or die. (Example: the Linux distribution timeline.)
What affects the LENGTH of a product life cycle?	Industry (auto ~7 yrs vs phone ~1 yr), new technologies (digital tools speed up, complexity slows), and the starting point. Trend: shorter cycles, countered by sustainability.
Define new development, wide derivation, close derivation.	New development = nothing reused. Wide derivation = basic features inherited from predecessor. Close derivation = most carried over with minor adjustments. (Landline → mobile → smartphone.)
List the 6 phases of the product-life-cycle curve.	0 Investment, 1 Introduction, 2 Growth, 3 Maturity, 4 Saturation, 5 Degradation.
Characterise phase 0 (Investment) and phase 1 (Introduction).	0: development + production setup, high cost & uncertainty, as short as possible. 1: slow sales, no profit yet, ends at break-even (reach fast).
Characterise phase 2 (Growth) and phase 3 (Maturity).	2: strong/steep sales rise, first revenues, short & steep. 3: most profitable, growth declines, should be as long as possible.
Characterise phase 4 (Saturation) and phase 5 (Degradation).	4: no growth, sales fall, profit falls even faster. 5: profit negative, take the product off the market.
What is the aim of product life cycle management (LCM)?	Coordinate the different product cycles to avoid company fluctuations — continuous production utilization, constant workload, consistent revenue. Avoid a successor "hole".
Which LCM measures lengthen/stimulate a cycle?	Cost measures: remove unneeded functions (focusing), remove parts not experienced, cut over-spec (e.g. smaller semiconductors); plus product enrichment (new features).
Why keep selling a product in the degradation phase?	Retain long-term customers, cross-sales ("entry-ticket" product), and shared investment / scale pricing across products.
What is the BCG matrix and its limitation?	Boston Consulting Group portfolio tool plotting market growth × relative market share to make product decisions; it only records actuals — it does NOT forecast.
BCG: describe the Star quadrant and its decision.	High growth, high market share, best product → invest from own cash flow, or skim without reducing market share.
BCG: describe the Cash Cow quadrant and its decision.	Low/stagnating growth, high share, "milking cow" → milk/skim, no discounts.
BCG: describe the Question Mark quadrant and its decision.	High-growth-potential market, low share, new product → invest from other sources or discontinue.
BCG: describe the Poor Dog quadrant and its decision.	Low growth, low share, discontinued product → terminate, at latest when contribution margin (DB) is negative.
Typical BCG order through a product life cycle?	Question Mark → Star → Cash Cow → Poor Dog. Question Marks create future Stars; Cash Cows finance investments.
How is relative market share calculated in the BCG exercise?	Company market share ÷ competitor market share (>1 means you lead).
What is configuration management, and how does it differ from change management?	Managing the combination (configuration) of HW+SW changes and the resulting properties (Ger. Konfigurationsmanagement). Change focuses on a single change/measure; configuration focuses on the interaction of changes.
List the targets of configuration management.	Handle variant complexity, manage configuration items (HW/SW/combos), ensure system performance/function/integrity, document changes, inform all parties, enable concurrent/distributed engineering, enable roll-backs, create reproducible configurations.
Name the 5 steps of the configuration-management process.	1) CM organization, 2) Configuration identification, 3) Configuration control, 4) Configuration status accounting, 5) Configuration verification and audit.
In which CM step does change management take place?	Step 3 — Configuration control.
What standards describe configuration management?	EIA-649C (ANSI/EIA), Automotive SPICE (SUP), IEEE 828-2012, ISO 10007, NIST; needed for ISO 26262 ch.8 (vehicle FuSi) and ISO 20000 (IT service mgmt).
What is variant management (VM) and its target?	Business model defines the product variants to develop. Target: as many variants as needed for revenue, but as few as possible for complexity — use standard interfaces & tool kits.
What are the tasks of variant management?	Transparency about variants, optimizing (create/delete variants), interconnection with LCM and impact on configuration management.
How does a shared base product help variants?	Same base "below the outer shape" → components sourced more often → cheaper per piece (economy of scale); differentiate by visual appearance and features/configurations.
Where does variant management cause additional effort?	Development (what must the base change?), Testing (which tests can be skipped safely?), Sales (avoid variants negativing each other; build IT-configurators), General (banned variants? cannibalization?).
Reasons to increase vs decrease variants?	Increase: customization, new markets (US vs EU), new clientele (teens→silver agers), new use cases (craft→medical). Decrease: cut cost via synergies (e.g. one plug for all).
Economy of scale and ROI of a variant?	A new variant causes low extra cost (base covers main costs) and has fewer customers, but its ROI is typically higher than the base.
Variant decision: base positive, derivation positive, sum positive?	Implement the variant (case 1).
Variant decision: base positive, derivation negative, sum positive?	Implement only if the variant's extra economy of scale is the reason the base's business case is positive (case 3).
Variant decision: base positive, derivation negative, sum negative?	Don't implement; check the base variant is still business-case positive (case 4).
Variant decision: base negative, derivation positive, sum negative?	Stop the product, optimize the base, or add more positive-BC variants (case 6).
Software tools for version control (code)?	Azure DevOps, BitKeeper, BitBucket, Git, IBM Rational Synergy, RCS, Subversion.
Software tools for product portfolio management?	cplace and ClickUp.
Summary: when is no change management needed, and why is it needed in reality?	Ideally never. In reality: traceability (versioning), releasable/conform product, cost control, avoid extra workforce/missed deadlines/dev issues, keep high quality.
What is the closing message of the chapter?	While change management is important, don't be afraid of changes.
