#separator:tab
#html:false
#columns:Question	Answer
What is Design Thinking?	A method for developing creative ideas and for problem solving, centred on the customer.
Which competence does this module give (level)?	Develop new ideas and solutions for systems from a given problem using "design thinking" (level 3: apply).
Which step of System Engineering is Ideation / Design Thinking?	Step 5 (Ideation), after Risk and Change Management, before Design and Test.
What three things does design thinking put into focus?	The customer / benefit, the possibility to realize (feasibility), and commercial viability.
How should the design-thinking team be composed?	As heterogeneous (diverse) as possible.
What kind of method is design thinking, and what does it need?	An agile method that needs several iterations to reach the goal.
What is the core motto of design thinking?	"Fail fast and cheap!"
What are the two "spaces" in the design thinking process?	Problem Space (understand the problem & customer) and Solution Space (create & test solutions).
List the six steps of the design thinking process in order.	(1) Understand, (2) Observe, (3) Design Principles, (4) Ideation, (5) Prototyping, (6) Testing.
Which steps belong to the Problem Space?	Understand and Observe (steps 1–2); step 3 Design Principles bridges into the Solution Space.
Which steps belong to the Solution Space?	Ideation, Prototyping and Testing (steps 4–6).
Is the design thinking process linear or iterative?	Iterative — you loop through prototyping & testing several times.
(1) Understand — what is its content?	Understand the problem and the target; build the team.
In "Understand", what must you describe instead of the technical solution?	The target condition after using the technology (the desired outcome), NOT the technical solution.
Name questions answered in the "Understand" step.	What should be newly developed? What's the problem? What's the target condition? Who is the customer? Which environment conditions apply?
How do you carry out the "Understand" step?	An initial expert circle / brainstorming, updated with each new piece of information during the process.
(2) Observe — what is its content?	Understand the customer: their will, wishes and inner needs; collect as much information as possible.
What information should you collect about the customer in "Observe"?	The actual problem to solve, what it should be able to do, and personal background (family, hobbies, …).
How do you carry out the "Observe" step?	Talk to and interview the customer, spend time with / observe them, and find the relevant peer groups.
Why are "extreme voices" valuable in Observe?	Extreme voices raise important information that the average customer would not specifically point out.
Two key rules during interviews (Observe)?	Let the customers talk, not the interviewer; and don't sell your own idea.
What does the persona competency level scale measure?	The persona's (technology) knowledge, rated from 0 (no knowledge) to 5 (expert).
Competency level 0 and 1?	0 = no knowledge; 1 = Newbie (has heard of it, knows where to find info, still uncertain).
Competency level 5 (Expert)?	Specialist in the field; handles complex tasks alone; constantly advances the state of the art with new approaches.
(3) Design Principles — what is its content?	Synthesis of the first two steps: find patterns / common sense between customers.
In Design Principles, how do you capture the customer?	Create a profile using "Personas" or "Point-of-View" and visualize the customer's point of view.
What must you update during the Design Principles step?	Your "(1) Understand" — the problem, target, and needed functions/features.
What is a Persona?	A concept from analytical psychology describing the outer view and acting (role/face) of a person.
What is a Buyer Persona?	An adaptation of the persona to economics; a fictional but fitting person describing the target customers of a product.
What is the purpose of a Buyer Persona?	To describe the customer fully so you can take decisions in their name (would he/she like/use/handle it?).
Helpful mindset for writing a persona?	Imagine you write a novel and need to describe the person (describe them like a good actress would a role).
What demographic fields does a persona card contain?	Name, Sex, Age, Domicile, Relationship status, Kids, Job, Income, Education (fictional but fitting).
Besides demographics, what four "feeling" sections does a persona card have?	Motivates, Frustrates, Goals, and Pain Points / Problems.
How many core technologies are noted on the persona card?	Knowledge about 5 relevant core technologies.
In the example persona, who is Jack Johnsen?	A 54-year-old married lifeguard at the Baltic Sea with 3 kids; income ~3,150€/month; trained as a paramedic.
Jack Johnsen's motivates / frustrates?	Motivates: fresh air, working with kids, surfing. Frustrates: bad weather, empty smartphone, littering tourists.
(4) Ideation — what is its content?	Create ideas to solve the customer's pain points.
What is the rule about boundaries in Ideation?	There are NO boundaries (cost, technical limits…) — the crazier, the better the idea.
What follows idea creation in Ideation?	Consolidation of ideas, decision making, getting customer feedback, and (if needed) competitor analysis.
How do you carry out Ideation?	Individual creation of ideas → gather & discuss all ideas → decide via tools → get customer feedback.
Name two decision-making tools used in Ideation.	Morphological box and QFD (Quality Function Deployment).
Which criteria are used to select ideas?	Practicability, efficiency and economy.
(5) Prototyping — what is its content?	Create a tangible, physical prototype that can be experienced.
What is the premise for building a prototype?	Everything is allowed — but the simpler, the better!
Key rules when giving a prototype to the customer?	NO verbal explanation; the customer must understand the solution (not you); it must solve the customer's problem, not realize your idea.
(6) Testing — what is its content?	The customer tests the prototype to get feedback; if it fails it can be changed or discarded next cycle.
How do you carry out Testing?	No demonstration; visually observe the customer using the product; take several iterations.
What do you do if the customer doesn't understand the prototype?	Change or even discard the idea in the next cycle; observe and note improvements, then iterate.
What is the famous MRI design-thinking example?	An MRI was scary for children, so it was redesigned (e.g. as a playful adventure) so kids accept it — solving the real fear, not just the machine.
What does the MRI example teach?	Solve the customer's real problem (the child's fear), not only the technical problem.
In the workshop exercise, how is the class organised?	Into 5 teams; each team gets one set of workshop material and each person a stack of paper templates.
Interview rule in the exercise (Observe)?	Each person interviews min. 2 customers from OTHER groups (not your own); describe the problem only, no solution.
Ideation-create rule in the exercise?	Individual drawing/painting only — NO writing, NO exchange in the group; min. 5 (better 10) ideas.
How are the best ideas selected in the exercise?	Share in the group, take/modify the best 5, and decide with a "system" e.g. a morphological box.
How many ideas are prototyped in the exercise?	2 ideas, chosen as a group based on customer feedback.
Total time for the workshop exercise?	140 min base + 10 min per team = 190 min.
What must the final presentation answer?	What was the problem? Who are your personas? What ideas did you go through? What was the final solution?
Summary — what is design thinking in one line?	A customer-centred method for designing products through fast, iterative cycles that analyse and solve customer needs.
